The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
Our present show is an interview with author Jerry Pornell. Pornell began writing science
fiction fairly recently in the 1970s, but he's already had a huge impact on the field. He's
been president of the Science Fiction Writers of America, for instance. He's created a future
history, an empire called the Codominium, which is extrapolated from our present political
situation. He's also co-authored with Larry Niven a number of well-known novels, The Best
Selling Lucifer's Hammer, a graphic fictional study of what might happen should accommodate
Earth as one of them, and The Moten God's Eye, perhaps the best first contact novel
written to date. More recently, however, his career has taken a new turn. He's dedicated
himself to the future of the planet Earth. He's trying to revive the United States
Space Program and is working on a federal committee to that end. He writes a science
column for Galaxy Magazine, and he's recently published a nonfiction book titled A Step
Farther Out, which consists of essays on potential methods of spaceflight, on plans on how we
could colonize a solar system, and an explanation of the L5 Society. He's gotten a deserved
reputation as one of the country's foremost futurists. His concern about our future was
evident when he spoke to the Science Fiction Radio Show.
In The Moten God's Eye, your co-author Larry Niven and you were trying to write what I
believe you called the epitome of a first contact novel. You must have had to develop
quite a bit of background information for that, didn't you?
In general, developing the Modi culture?
I can't work without knowing why things happen. I've learned that Larry is a lot more able
to believe in six impossible things before breakfast than I am. So he can sit there and
write a story that you hadn't really believed could happen. I'm not very good at that. I
generally don't, I can't stay interested in something unless I think it might happen,
which means that I have to work out how it could have happened. So we ended up getting
quite a lot of stuff on the subject of the Modi. As far as I can see, they're a fairly
self-consistent set of aliens. Probably there's no such thing, but their evolution could easily
have come about, I think.
Why did you and Niven choose to put Modan Gadzaya in your future history of the codominium?
Oh, I don't know. I didn't believe in his future history. His known space series has
got, in my judgment, a whole year to drive across through. I just don't think it could
happen, neither does he, by the way. So, which doesn't mean it's not interesting because
it isn't. It's interesting and a lot of fun. But again, I have this problem of not really
being able to do a lot of work on things that I don't believe in. So we built this around
the so and I already had it worked out.
How did you put together the codominium?
Oh, I don't know. About the same way we're putting it together in the real world, isn't
it? It looks now as if the alliance seems to be the United States and China, but it
could just about as easily given a few changes in the structure of government in Russia. It
had been the United States and Russia against China, couldn't it?
Yeah, very possibly.
And in fact, that was a very logical way for things to have gone back in the 60s when the
Chinese were running around trying to tear the world apart, you may remember.
Yes.
They've got reasonable and the Russians didn't, as it happened, but it could just as easily
have gone the other way.
So really, you took and extrapolated our existing political situation.
Yeah, well, I'm not convinced it won't happen yet, of course. I mean, Russia's got to go
out of business one of these days, and who knows who takes over over there? They don't
know. Why should we know? I don't suppose there's anybody in the world who knows who's
going to be in charge when Brezhnev goes out of business, right?
Right.
Including Brezhnev. The United States at least has got a certain amount of stability in
the region, make a fairly short list of people who are likely to be president, and the mechanism
by which they get there is fairly well known. The mechanism by which you get to be the
unanimous choice of the Russian people to be their fearless leader is not really known
even to the Russians, is it?
Not from what I can tell.
Well, I'm going to, Maria thought he had it set up at one point, and his gun stuck in
his pocket quite literally. They had a shootout at a cabinet meeting, and he lost.
So you take the coefficient or friction of a gunfight against a wool suit, and you fall
right in as one of the important variables of human history, right?
Right.
Since if Maria had been in charge, he never knows what happens. I suspect the codominium
would have come about if Maria had taken over instead of Khrushchev. He was just a
cynical power broker. I doubt that he believed in very much of anything.
Perhaps you could give us a bit of background information about yourself.
Yeah, well, I used to write books before I took out saving the space program for a living.
It seems to be what I'm doing lately is I'm sitting here with a telephone glued in my
ear just for you, Carl. I've been on a phone in Washington for two hours, yesterday all
day. We're running around trying to rebuild the space program and still live within the
budget cuts. It's not easy to do. I'm chairman of a citizen advisory group working on a plan
for the administration. But don't let that meeting be guaranteed. They're going to take
our advice. We have a problem right now in that the administration wants to chop back
the budget, which you can certainly, they've got to do. The country cannot go on like it.
At the same time, if we don't keep up some investments in high technology, we're not going to have
anything to live off of. You've got to invest something once in a while. Unfortunately,
the structure of the government and the fact situation and the rest of it is such that you are
not going to get private investment in things as inherently risky as space technology because
they don't let you keep into the profits. Profits are nasty words nowadays. Who wants to risk
everything on something that you can't win on? You're going to have to have government research
until they change some of the laws that I'm going to do with the tax structure. If we don't do that,
then I guess we'll sit here and become, we're already in underdevelopation. Our major export
is agriculture. We're beginning to import high technology. We're buying airplanes from overseas
now. Can you imagine that? Eastern Airlines is now flying a thing called the Airbus, which is made
in Europe. American domestic airlines are flying foreign airplanes. We're importing computers,
and we're going to be doing more of that pretty soon. But underdeveloped countries, we don't start
doing some investment. We're going to stay that way. So that's what I have been doing for the last
couple of weeks, and which is why I don't have my lot of thoughts on the subject of science fiction
because I'm still sitting here in the eye of a storm trying to balance about 35 different
people who are involved in the air and get a rational program for high technology investment.
You talked about a lot of those same things in your book a step further out, didn't you?
Yeah, right. That's one reason why I seem to be involved in doing some of these things and being in
charge of not in charge of that sort of ringmaster to a fairly large group of scientists and
researchers because of that fact that it's a certain amount of attention.
In that book, you state that our destiny is mankind is linked to our expanding ourselves into space.
Yeah, well, there's that in a step further out, and I said in other columns and other places,
how long is the future? We presented this, Bassoni and I presented this in the paper to an
annual meeting in the American Association for the Advancement of Science. We think of it as a
reasonably important philanthropic question. How long is the future? If it's the way matters and
faster and the limited growth people think it's only a couple of hundred years, then there is no point
in worrying about it and we might as well eat, drink and be merry, right? But if on the other hand
the future is another a billion generation, a hundred billion years, then we are not the same
species as an outfit that's going to live another 200 years, are we? And if mankind's future is
a hundred billion years and there's no reason why it should not be a hundred billion years, then we're
going to have to outlive the Earth and indeed outlive the Sun and the solar system. We may
even have to outlive this galaxy. Now there's nothing in principle that keeps us from doing
that. I know of nothing that could stop us other than ourselves. I've said this a lot of times, but
I don't know how, you can't say it too often. One of the most ironic things that ever happened was that
just after we went to the moon, they held in Stockholm a conference whose theme title was
Only One Earth and that's insane. We don't live on only one Earth. We live if we want to in a system
that's got nine planets and I used to say 38 moons, but now I think it's up to about 50. And a million
asteroids and a million comets, that's a lot of resources out there plus an enormous
thermonuclear generator which the Environmental Protection Association would never let you
activate that thermonuclear generator out there. It's far too dangerous. We call it the Sun.
If we're going to have a hundred billion years future, we've got to get off this ball and we better do it
pretty quick because it's fairly obvious that if we stay cooked up here on it long enough, we're going to do
something to ourselves that will keep us from going out there. So that's why some of us like me seem to
get a little shrill about it sometimes. It's a feeling of urgency here because right now we have the resources.
Who knows how long we'll have them?
Yeah, I was wondering is there some sort of timetable that we're sort of set into in getting into space?
Well, I don't know what you mean by timetable set into. Who would set it?
Well, are there any sort of resources, restrictions that would allow us to get into space now but maybe not later on?
Pure population pressures. If you believe in the limits to growth model, we don't have very many more generations as well.
If you believe those models, you're going to have tremendous pressures to widely distribute the capital.
Right? At the moment, Western civilization is a fairly wealthy island in the middle of a pretty large sea of poverty.
Very enormous pressures to sort of redistribute the wealth and if you do then everybody is more or less measurable.
There will be very little wealth. Now, it's unlikely we're going to actually do that because very few people really
popperize themselves voluntarily. But on the other hand, that's a pretty ripe situation for breeding wars.
Bringing back the code of enium by the way. My suspicion is that the United States and the Soviet Union was rather a lot,
the so-called third world countries, from impoverishing them then you see what I'm getting at.
Right.
Genuine foreign aid is, the United States has a fairly good record of generosity on that but it is still fairly small compared to our national budget.
We do not give until it hurts much. So are we likely to? Nor do I think we should because if we impoverish ourselves,
no one will have the resources to go to space. That's a very expensive proposition going to space, right?
It takes a peculiar combination of extra wealth of educated people, high talent, machine jobs, the resources and the determination by somebody to do it.
All of those things have to come together at the same time and that just seems sufficiently fragile to me.
In fact, the whole civilization seems fairly fragile to me. Roberto Vaca wrote a pretty good book called The Cutting Dark Age in which he discusses a number of fairly catastrophic scenarios
guiding with, well, I don't know, widespread power failure.
In which Western civilization just essentially sort of collapses back into a level approximating the, I don't know, 1900 to 1920 era.
Everybody's reasonably well off but nobody's got a lot and there certainly isn't enough to go to space.
A lot of autonomously small communities living off the land counters and so forth is a considerably decreasing population.
As he says, going off and living in a country in small towns without modern convenience and everything is the sort of thing people do now for fun,
but it's not very amusing as a way of life, but it may well be the way of life. You can easily see this kind of.
Larry and I wrote a book called Lucifer's Hammer about a natural disaster that can bring about much the same kind of result.
It's true that's a rare one. I doubt the other two are going to be whammed with a comet, but on the other hand, Alvarez at Berkeley,
the business is a Nobel Prize in Business, where Berkeley has just come up with a fairly convincing proof that that's what happened to the dinosaur about 100 million years ago,
because the earth really did get whammed with some big and it killed them all off.
And furthermore, he seems to have demonstrated that it happens about every 100 million years and to last one half and a 100 million years ago,
which doesn't mean it's going to happen this year.
But I can think of a lot of wars to this general disorganization.
We keep building bureaucratic structure until we can't support the weight of it any longer.
That would use up all the resources that might take us to space and if they're gone, how do you get there?
The interesting thing, I mean space is expensive.
Each Apollo shot cost almost 15 days' supply of cigarettes.
The amount of money that was spent on an Apollo would have kept the United States in liquor for a whole week.
It's expensive.
It's not very expensive compared to a lot of things we've heard, but it's still expensive.
Even though there are some restrictions on us, you've talked about in your articles about that we can survive and if I might quote you,
we can survive with style.
How might that be brought about?
Well, that can give you some off in the scenario.
But we are trying to convince the President and the administration of this for essentially the same amount of money
we're spending on the space program now, redirected slightly and with a little attitude, it isn't taking much.
To give you the following scenario, we could have by 1988 a space industrial park,
which is essentially a housekeeping satellite that has industrial facilities and power and oxygen.
And with private companies could go up and put their own modules on to it to make things.
And I give you some ideas of things you can make in space you can't make.
The use of ethical drug processes are enormous in space.
And some drugs like urokinase are worth a million dollars a kilogram.
Now, you can make those in fairly large quantities in space because you get perfect mixing and you have good temperature controls
and there's all kinds of reasons why space turns out to be a good place to do certain very high-value intrinsically low-eochemical processes.
You can get yields that are thousands of times better than they are on Earth.
Turbine blade magnets, people talk about ball bearings that's not so clear that you can actually profitably manufacture ball bearings in space
because you're making them on Earth now.
We don't play foam steels, ways of making steel beams that are shot through with air bubbles in such a way that you or I could take one of them up
or things ten feet long by putting a carrier around with you, but it's just about as strong as if it were solid.
So that sort of thing. Very long carbon speciality.
There are a lot of products that we are fairly certain would be profitable, but fairly certainly it's not good enough that anybody's going to risk going to all the expense of doing that by themselves.
But if you've got already the facility so that you're only having to spend, the private company's only having to spend the marginal cost of this,
of adding their own module onto it and paying some rent to the government as a landlord,
then it becomes a much more attractive proposition, particularly if you give them some decent tax breaks.
Now this can all be in place by 1988, but by the year 2000 it can be manufacturing things in space from materials taken from mines on the moon.
And all this at a level of US expenditure that is not large compared to what we're doing now.
It's in the order of maybe ten or twelve billion a year.
Small potatoes.
In the United States, they spent like five percent of its national budget over a period of ten years on kind of a canal.
Everybody believes that was a good thing to do. We did well by doing good.
But we don't have to spend anything like that. Two and a half percent of our national budget on space over the next twenty years could probably make the whole world rich.
Certainly could keep us fabulously wealthy.
Because the... you were talking about when you begin to manufacture things using power from space and materials from the moon,
you were talking about actual new wealth.
Nothing that has never existed on this planet before. You're actually bringing wealth to this planet.
And that's quite a thing.
It's all very possible. I mean it's not dreams, it's not fantasy, it's nothing ridiculous about it.
You have permanent moon base by the year 2000. You begin to get lunar colonies.
I suspect that people would choose to live there. Some will. Some won't. Some will.
I'm sure I could find five hundred highly qualified families that would be willing to move to the moon tomorrow.
Knowing they'd never come back. They're very qualified people.
I think very seriously about doing them myself.
It's a new frontier and there are always people who fight frontier atmospheres.
From there, the takeoff is clear. There's no going back from that.
And we have then ensured that there is no single disaster. They wipe out the whole human race.
It's taken a pretty good step towards fulfilling our national duty.
Destiny is the human race.
Building our hundred billion year future.
And I would think that doing something like that would be attractive to the president.
I mean my suspicion is that the statesman who put us in a space permanently would be remembered a lot longer than Isabella the Great and Prince Henry the navigator.
I mean would literally be remembered through billions of years of human history.
The man who put us permanently into space. Along with John Kennedy.
This is a scene to me like a fairly attractive proposition for some statesman.
And it does not seem to me like an unpopular idea with the public.
Look at the sales. Is that what the Star Wars is still the biggest money maker of all time?
Movie?
Star Trek is still on in syndication 12, 14 years after the...
This is ridiculous.
There's no such thing as a science fiction book. I got books in print that have been going around for 10, 12 years.
I'm a relative newcomer to the field.
There are some science fiction books in print that are 30 years old.
Now, who won the Pulitzer Prize for literature 12 years ago?
I bet his book's not in print.
You're not talking about something that's unpopular with the people of this country.
I think high technology is very popular.
And look, you took a good sale to Science Magazine now.
They have a way you turn around it. A new Science Magazine.
So it would seem to me that here's a monstrous opportunity for somebody to go out and do well by doing good.
But become one of the most famous people in history by doing something that is politically very popular.
God knows it didn't hurt John Kennedy any.
The Man's Kind
As you can tell from our conversation, Dr. Pranell is concerned with the future.
His excitement about Man's Kind's future is expressed in his fiction such as The Janissaries and his latest book, King David's Spaceship.
And in his nonfiction such as A Step Further Out, which I highly recommend.
With the advent of the Space Shuttle, the opportunity to work in the space program and the newly forming space industries will be opening up to everyone.
If you are interested in knowing more about what we discussed in this program, I suggest you contact the L5 Society.
Their address is the L5 Society 1060 East Elm Street, Tucson, Arizona 85719.
Student memberships are $15 and regular memberships are $20. Both include the monthly L5 newsletter.
This is David Cruz. Darrell Lane. And David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, in conjunction with KOCVFM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.